Consensus algorithms/rules are used to reconcile security and decentralization.

Consensus is about being able to arrive at a common state, while maintaining decentralization. Intending to produce a system of strict rules without rulers, no one i charge.

## Consensus via Proof of Work
Mining is to secure the blockchain, keeping control over the system decentralized across as much people as possible. Newly minted currency is an incentive for those who contribute to the security.

Currently Ethereum is also PoW bit different than Bitcoin's and is called `Ethash`. Switching is being considered.

## Consensus via Proof of Stake
There's a handicap on Ethereum's PoW called `difficulty bomb`, making PoW mining of Ethereum more difficult, focing the pending transition to proof-of-stake.

Ethereum's planned PoS algorithm is called `Casper`. Replacement for `Ethash` but postponed.

PoS works as follows. Blockchain tracks a sets of validators, anyone holds the blockchain's base currency(ethereum case, ether) can be a validator by sending a special transaction that locks their ether into a deposit(stake). Initially, validator risks losing their deposit("being slashed")  if the block they staked on is rejected by majority validators. But validators earn an award proportional to their deposited stake, for every block accepted by the majority. In PoS punishment is intrinsic to the blockchain(loss of staked ether) while PoW is extrinsic (loss of funds spent on mining with electricity).

PoW will cause GPU shortages, unless PoS is implemented, Ethereum will be part of the problem.