## Ether Currency Units
Ether is also identified as ETH with symbols Ξ.

Can be divided to smaller units, to the smallest unit possible (wei)

Exponent | Common name | SI name
---------|-------------|--------
1 | wei | Wei 
10^3 | Babbage | Kilowei
10^6 | Lovelace | Megawei
10^9 | Shannon | Gigawei
10^12 | Szabo | Microether
10^15 | Finney | Milliether
10^18 | Ether | Ether 
10^21 | Grand | Kiloether

## Wallets
Wallets is just an application that manages your Ethereum account. 

Wallets can be changed by transferring funds or just exporting the private keys and import to the new one.

The private key holds all the ether assets, wallets just make it easier to access them.

## Gas
Each transaction costs gas, which is collected by miners to validate the transaction.

The gas limit is set at 21,000 gas units of a basic transaction. 
1 gwei = 0.000021 ETH

If gas price is 3 gwei, the total gas price is 0.000063 ETH.

However gas prices fluctuate depending on cocurrent transactions

## Externally Owned Accounts (EOAs) and Contracts
EOAs like Metamask have a private key and control over access to funds or contracts.

Contract accounts have smart contract code, does not have a private key. Instead, owned by the logic of the smart contract code. It also cannot initiate a transaction since no private key.

When a transaction destination is a contract address, the contract runs in the EVM, using the transaction's data as input by calling functions within the contract. Contracts can also react by calling other contracts, building complex execution paths.

## Simple Contract: A Test Ether Faucet 
Simple and flawed contract
```sol
// SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0

// Version of Solidity compiler this program was written for

pragma solidity 0.6.4;

// Our first contract is a faucet!

contract Faucet {

// Accept any incoming amount

receive() external payable {}

// Give out ether to anyone who asks

function withdraw(uint withdraw_amount) public {

// Limit withdrawal amount

require(withdraw_amount <= 100000000000000000);

// Send the amount to the address that requested it

msg.sender.transfer(withdraw_amount);

}

}
```
`Receive` function is called if the transaction that triggered the contract didn't contain any data, making it a plain Ether transfer, thats why it's also `external payable`.

Next function is `withdraw`, taking a uint named `withdraw_amount` and is `public`.

Then sets a limit on withdrawels with `require(withdraw_amount <= 10^17);` which is 0.1 ether in wei. If withdraw amount is too high, contract execution stops and fails with an `exception`.

Now comes the actual withdrawal `msg.sender.transfer(withdraw_amount);` 

The `msg` object is accessable from all contracts, representing the transaction that triggered the execution of the contract. 

`sender` is the sender's address and `transfer` transfers ether from the current contract to the address of the sender.

## Compiling the Faucet Contract
For Web IDEs, use Remix.

To register a contract on the blockchain, create a transaction with the `zero address`, an address that tells the ETH blockchain we want to register a contract.

All transactions are logged in Etherscan https://etherscan.io/
