## Life Cycle of a Smart Contract
Smart contracts are written in Solidity, but to run, they're compiled to the `low level` bytecode that runs in the EVM. 

Once compiled, they're deployed via a special `contract creation` transaction.

Contracts cannot be changed but can be "destroyed" via `SELFDESTRUCT`, costing "negative gas", a gas refund. Does not remove transaction history since blockchain is immutable.

The main "product" of the Solidity project is the Solidity compiler, `solc`, which converts programs written in the Solidity language to EVM bytecode.

#### Compiling with the Solidity Compiler (solc)

Now, we will use the Solidity compiler on the command line to compile our contract directly. The Solidity compiler solc offers a variety of options, which you can see by passing the --help argument.

We use the --bin and --optimize arguments of solc to produce an optimized binary of our example contract:

$ **solc --optimize --bin Faucet.sol**
======= Faucet.sol:Faucet =======
Binary:
608060405234801561001057600080fd5b5060cc8061001f6000396000f3fe6080604052600436106
01f5760003560e01c80632e1a7d4d14602a576025565b36602557005b600080fd5b34801560355760
0080fd5b50605060048036036020811015604a57600080fd5b50356052565b005b67016345785d8a0
000811115606657600080fd5b604051339082156108fc029083906000818181858888f19350505050
1580156092573d6000803e3d6000fd5b505056fea26469706673582212205cf23994b22f7ba19eee5
6c77b5fb127bceec1276b6f76ca71b5f95330ce598564736f6c63430006040033

The result that solc produces is a hex-serialized binary that can be submitted to the Ethereum blockchain.

## The Ethereum Contract ABI
ABI = Application binary interface, an interface between 2 program modules; often between the OS and user programs. Is the primary way of encoding and decoding data in and out of machine code.

We use the solc command-line Solidity compiler to produce the ABI for our _Faucet.sol_ example contract:

$ **solc --abi Faucet.sol**
======= Faucet.sol:Faucet =======
Contract JSON ABI
[{"inputs":[{"internalType":"uint256","name":"withdraw_amount","type":"uint256"}], \
"name":"withdraw","outputs":[],"stateMutability":"nonpayable","type":"function"}, \
{"stateMutability":"payable","type":"receive"}]

Compiler produces a JSON array describing the 2 functions defined in `Faucet.sol`. Using the `ABI` , applications like wallets or a DApp browser can construct transactions that call functions in Faucet with correct arguments.

## Programming with Solidity
Data Types | Definition
-----------|--------
Boolean | true, false with logical operators like `!, &&, ||, ==, !=`
Integer | uint or int, from uint/int8 to 256, 2^256 - 1
Fixed Point | fixed point numbers, declared with `u` 
Address | 20 byte ETH address
Byte Array(Fixed) | Fixed-size array of bytes, declared with bytes1 to bytes32
Byte Array(Dynamic) | Variable sized array of bytes, declared with bytes or strings
Enum | User-defined type for enumerating discrete values
Arrays | arrays, can be fixed or dynamic
Struct | User-defined data containers for grouping variables

##### Predefined Global Variables and Function
Function | Usage
---------|------
msg.sender | the address that initiated the contract call
msg.value | value of ether send with this call in wei
msg.gas | gas left in the execution environment, depreciated and replaced with `gasleft`
msg.data | data payload of the call into the contract
msg.sig | first 4 bytes of the data payload
tx.gasprice | gas price of the calling transaction
tx.origin | address of the originating EOA of the transaction, UNSAFE
block.blockhash(blockNumber) | block hash of a block number, replaced with blockhash function
block.coinbase | address of the recipient of current block's fees and block reward
block.difficulty | difficulty (proof-of-work) of the current block
block.gaslimit | max amount of gas spent across all transactions included in the current block
block.number | block number, blockchain height
block.timestamp | timestamp placed in the current block by the miner, secs since the Unix epoch
address.balance | balance of address in wei
address.transfer(_amount_) | transfer the amount in wei to this address, throws an exception on error
address.send(_amount_) | same but returns false instead of throwing an exception on error, UNSAFE depending on the return value of send
address.call(_payload_) | low-level call function, can construct a msg call with data payload, returns false on error, UNSAFE, recipient can use up all the gas, causing contract to halt with an OOG exception, check return values of call
address.delegatecall(_payload_) | same but full msg context can be seen by the current contract, returns false on error, UNSAFE, advance use only
addmod, mulmod | for modulo addition and multiplication
keccak256, sha256, sha3, ripemd160 | functions to calculate hashes with various hash algorithms
ecrecover | recovers address used to sign a message from the signature
selfdestruct(_recipeint_address_) | deletes current contract, sending all remaining ether to recipient address
this | address of the currently executing contract account

## Contract Definition
Solidity has 2 other object types similar to `contract`

###### interface
structured exactly like a `contract`, but none of the functions are defined, only declared. This type of declaration is called a `stub`, telling you the function's arguments and returns types without any implementation. An interface specifies the "shape" of the contract; when inherited, each function declared by the interface must be defined by the child.

###### library
library contracts are meant to be deployed once and used by other contracts, using `delegatecall` method


## Contract Constructor and selfdestruct
When contracts are created, it also runs the `constructor function` if one exists to initialize the contract. Constructor runs in the same transaction as the contract creation, its optional to have one though.

Constructor is a function whose name matches the name of the contract:
```sol
contract MEContract {
	function MEContract() {
		// This is the contructor
	}
}
```
Hard part is that if the contract name is changed and the constructor function name is not changed, its no longer a contructor. Accidental typo is also an issue.

Imagne if the contructor sets who is the contract owner, if the function is not actually the constructor due to naming error, owner will be left unset at the time of contract creation, and the function might be deployed as a permanent and "callable" part of the contract like a normal function, allowing any 3rd party to hijack the contract and become the "owner" after contract creation.

To fix the problems with constructor functions based on same name, Solidity introduced a constructor keyword acting like a constructor function but with no name. Renaming the contract has no effect on the constructor at all, easier to identify which function is the constructor, looks like this:
```sol
pragma ^0.4.22
contract MEConstract {
	construct () {
		// This is the constructor
	}
}
```
A contract's life cycle starts with a creation transaction from an EOA or contract account. If there's a constructor, its executed as part of the contract creation to initiate the state of the contract as it is being created, and then is discarded.

The other end of the contract's life cycle is `contract destruction`. Contracts are destroyed through a special opcode called `SELFDESTRUCT`.

```sol
selfdestruct(address recipient);
```
Needs to be added to be able to delete the contract, not present by default.

##### Adding a Constructor and selfdestruct to our Faucet example
Originally our Faucet example contract was an eternal contract and can't be deleted. 

Let's change that, we want `selfdestruct` to be callable only by the EOA that created the contract. This is usually stored in an address variable called owner, our constructor sets the owner variable, and the `selfdestruct` function will first check that the owner called it directly.

First our constructor:
```sol
pragma solidity ^0.6.0;

contract Faucet {
	address owner;

	contructor() {
		owner = msg.sender;
	}

	[...]
}
```
Assigns the `msg.sender` as owner once the contract is created. Constructor only runs once, druing contract creation.

Adding a function to destroy the contract, only the owner should be able to:
```sol
function destroy() public {
	require(msg.sender == owner);
	selfdestruct(owner);
}
```

##### Function Modifiers
Modifiers can be applied to functions to create conditions applying to many functions in a contract.

```sol
modifier onlyOwner {
	require(msg.sender == owner);
	_;
}
```

This `_;` is a placeholder to be replaced by the code of the function we add this modifier to.

So now we just add onlyOwner to the function previously:
```sol
function destroy() public onlyOwner {
	selfdestruct(owner);
}
```

##### Contract Inheritance
```sol
contract Child is Parent1, Parent2 {
	[...]
}
```
Child contract inherits all methods, functionality and variables of Parent1 and 2. If another contract inherits Child, it also inherits Parent1 and Parent2.

##### Error Handling
Handled through 4 functions
- assert
- require
- revert
- throw(deprecated)

Once an error terminates a contract, all state changes, variables, balances etc are reverted causing no effect on state. Either transactions complete successfully or have no effect on state and reverted entirely.

`assert` and `require` operate the same way, stopping execution with an error if condition is false. `assert` is used when outcome is expected to be true, we use `assert` to test internal conditions, while `require` for testing inputs like function arguments or transaction fields.

`require` acts as a gate condition, preventing execution of the rest of the function and gives an error when not satisfied.

`revert` and `throw` functions halt the execution of the contract and revert state changes. `revert` is used now since `throw` is obsolete. `revert` can also take an error message as an argument, which is recorded in the transaction log.

Error checking functions add to gas price, but offer better error reporting.

## Events 
Events are used to construct log entries in the transaction receipt once a transaction completes.

Event objects take arguments that are serialized and recorded in the transaction logs. We can supply  the keyword indexed before an argument, to make the value part of an indexed table (hash table) that can be searched and filtered by an application.

Let's add 2 events to our example, one to log any withdrawals and another to log deposits.

```sol
contract Faucet is Mortal {
	event Withdrawel(address indexed to, uint amount);
	event Deposit(address indexed from, uint amount);

	[...]
}
```
We made addresses indexed, allowing search and filtering in any UI built to access our Faucet.

Next, we use `emit` to incorporate the event data in the transaction logs:
```sol
// Give ether to anyone who withdraws
function withdraw(uint withdraw_amount) public{
	[...]
	msg.sender.transfer(withdraw_amount);
	emit Withdrawal(msg.sender, withdraw_amount);
}

// Accept any incoming amount
receive () external payable {
	emit Deposit(msg.sender, msg.value);
}
```

##### Catching Events
With our contract setup to emit events, we need to see the results of the transaction and "catch" the events. The web3.js library provides a data structure containing a transaction's logs. In those we can see the events generated by the transaction.

Let's use `truffle` to run a test transaction on the revised Faucet contract.

The source code can be found in [the book’s GitHub repository](https://github.com/ethereumbook/ethereumbook) under _code/truffle/FaucetEvents_.
```
$ **truffle develop**
truffle(develop)> **compile**
truffle(develop)> **migrate**
Using network 'develop'.

Running migration: 1_initial_migration.js
  Deploying Migrations...
  ... 0xb77ceae7c3f5afb7fbe3a6c5974d352aa844f53f955ee7d707ef6f3f8e6b4e61
  Migrations: 0x8cdaf0cd259887258bc13a92c0a6da92698644c0
Saving successful migration to network...
  ... 0xd7bc86d31bee32fa3988f1c1eabce403a1b5d570340a3a9cdba53a472ee8c956
Saving artifacts...
Running migration: 2_deploy_contracts.js
  Deploying Faucet...
  ... 0xfa850d754314c3fb83f43ca1fa6ee20bc9652d891c00a2f63fd43ab5bfb0d781
  Faucet: 0x345ca3e014aaf5dca488057592ee47305d9b3e10
Saving successful migration to network...
  ... 0xf36163615f41ef7ed8f4a8f192149a0bf633fe1a2398ce001bf44c43dc7bdda0
Saving artifacts...

truffle(develop)> **Faucet.deployed().then(i => {FaucetDeployed = i})**
truffle(develop)> **FaucetDeployed.send(web3.utils.toWei(1, "ether")).then(res => \
                  { console.log(res.logs[0].event, res.logs[0].args) })**
Deposit { from: '0x627306090abab3a6e1400e9345bc60c78a8bef57',
  amount: BigNumber { s: 1, e: 18, c: [ 10000 ] } }
truffle(develop)> **FaucetDeployed.withdraw(web3.utils.toWei(0.1, "ether")).then(res => \
                  { console.log(res.logs[0].event, res.logs[0].args) })**
Withdrawal { to: '0x627306090abab3a6e1400e9345bc60c78a8bef57',
  amount: BigNumber { s: 1, e: 17, c: [ 1000 ] } }
```

After deploying the contract using the deployed function, we execute two transactions. The first transaction is a deposit (using send), which emits a Deposit event in the transaction logs:
```
Deposit { from: '0x627306090abab3a6e1400e9345bc60c78a8bef57',
  amount: BigNumber { s: 1, e: 18, c: [ 10000 ] } }
```

Next, we use the withdraw function to make a withdrawal. This emits a Withdrawal event:

```
Withdrawal { to: '0x627306090abab3a6e1400e9345bc60c78a8bef57',
  amount: BigNumber { s: 1, e: 17, c: [ 1000 ] } }
```

To get these events, we looked at the logs array returned as a result (res) of the transactions. The first log entry (logs[0]) contains an event name in logs[0].event and the event arguments in logs[0].args. By showing these on the console, we can see the emitted event name and the event arguments.

##### Calling other Contracts (send, call, callcode, delegatecall)
Useful but potentially dangerous. Might call other contracts despite expecting EOAs.

- Creating a new instance
Safest way is to create the other contract yourself, to be certain of its behavior and interfaces. Using `new`, instantiate it. This keyword creates a contract on the blockchain and return an object that you can use to reference it. Let's say we want to create and call a Faucet contract from within another contract called `Token`:
```sol
contract Token is Mortal {
		Faucet _faucet;

	constructor() {
		_faucet = new Faucet();
	}
}
```
This ensures we know the exact type of contract and its interface. The contract `Faucet` must be defined within the scope of `Token`, which we can do with an `import` statement if the definition is in another file:

```sol
import "Faucet.sol";

contract Token is Mortal {
		Faucet _faucet;

	constructor() {
		_faucet = new Faucet();
	}
}
```

Optionally we can specify the value of ether transfer on creation, and pass arguments to the new contract's constructor:

and also call the `destroy` function
```sol
import "Faucet.sol";

contract Token is Mortal {
		Faucet _faucet;
		
	constructor() {
		_faucet = (new Faucet).value(0.5 ether)();
	}

	function destroy() ownerOnly {
		_faucet.destroy();
	}
}
```

##### Addressing an existing instance
Another way is to call a contract by casting the address of an existing instance of the contract. 
```sol
import "Faucet.sol";

contract Token is Mortal {
	Faucet _faucet;

	constructor(address _f) {
		_faucet = Faucet(_f);
		_faucet.withdraw(0.1 ether);
	}
}
```

We take an address `_f` and cast it to a Faucet object. This is very risky since we don't know whether that address actually is a Faucet object. When calling `withdraw`, we assume it accepts the same arguments and executes the same code but we cannot be sure. The `withdraw` function at this address might execute something completely different than intended. Using addresses passed as input and casting them to specific objects is therefore more dangerous.

##### Raw call, delegatecall
Low level functions to call other contracts, flexible and dangerous ways to call other contracts.

Example, using a `call` method:
```sol
contract Token is Mortal {
	constructor(address _faucet) {
		_faucet.call("withdraw", 0.1 ether);
	}
}
```
This type of call is a `blind call` into a function, like contructing a raw transaction just under the contract's context. Tons of security risks notably `reentrancy`. The function returns false if there's an issue, evaluate the return value for error handling:

```sol
contract Token is Mortal {
	constructor(address _faucet) {
		if !(_faucet.call("withdraw", 0.1 ether)) {
			revert("Withdrawal from faucet failed");
			}
		}
}
```
Another variant of call is `delegatecall` which replaced the dangerous `callcode` which will depreciate soon.

`delegatecall` is different from a call as the msg context does not change. IE, a call changes the value of `msg.sender` to be the calling contract, while `delegatecall` keeps the same `msg.sender` as in the calling contract. Essentially it runs the code of another contract inside the context of the execution of the current contract, used often to invoke code from a library. Allowing us to draw on the pattern of using library functions stored elsewhere but have the code work with our own contract's storage data.

Still, use `delegatecall` with great caution, unexpected effects notably on calling a non-library.

Here's an example contract to show various call semantics used by `call` and `delegatecall` for calling libraries and contracts. In [CallExamples.sol: An example of different call semantics](https://github.com/ethereumbook/ethereumbook/blob/develop/07smart-contracts-solidity.asciidoc#call_examples_code), we use an event to log the details of each call and see how the calling context changes depending on the call type.

Example 4. CallExamples.sol: An example of different call semantics
```sol
pragma solidity ^0.4.22;

contract calledContract {
	event callEvent(address sender, address origin, address from);
	function calledFunction() public {
		emit callEvent(msg.sender, tx.origin, this);
	}
}

library calledLibrary {
	event callEvent(address sender, address origin, address from);
	function calledFunction() public {
	emit callEvent(msg.sender, tx.origin, this);
	}
}

contract caller {
	function make_calls(calledContract _calledContract) public {
	
	// Calling calledContract and calledLibrary directly
	_calledContract.calledFunction();
	calledLibrary.calledFunction();

	// Low-level calls using the address object for calledContract
	require(address(_calledContract).
		call(bytes4(keccak256("calledFunction()"))));
	require(address(_calledContract).
		delegatecall(bytes4(keccak256("calledFunction()"))));
	}
}
```

Let’s run this in a Truffle development environment and capture the events, to see how it looks:

truffle(develop)> **migrate**
Using network 'develop'.
[...]
Saving artifacts...
truffle(develop)> **(await web3.eth.getAccounts())[0]**
'0x627306090abab3a6e1400e9345bc60c78a8bef57'
truffle(develop)> **caller.address**
'0x8f0483125fcb9aaaefa9209d8e9d7b9c8b9fb90f'
truffle(develop)> **calledContract.address**
'0x345ca3e014aaf5dca488057592ee47305d9b3e10'
truffle(develop)> **calledLibrary.address**
'0xf25186b5081ff5ce73482ad761db0eb0d25abfbf'
truffle(develop)> **caller.deployed().then( i => { callerDeployed = i })**

truffle(develop)> **callerDeployed.make_calls(calledContract.address).then(res => \
                  { res.logs.forEach( log => { console.log(log.args) })})**
{ sender: '0x8f0483125fcb9aaaefa9209d8e9d7b9c8b9fb90f',
  origin: '0x627306090abab3a6e1400e9345bc60c78a8bef57',
  from: '0x345ca3e014aaf5dca488057592ee47305d9b3e10' }
{ sender: '0x627306090abab3a6e1400e9345bc60c78a8bef57',
  origin: '0x627306090abab3a6e1400e9345bc60c78a8bef57',
  from: '0x8f0483125fcb9aaaefa9209d8e9d7b9c8b9fb90f' }
{ sender: '0x8f0483125fcb9aaaefa9209d8e9d7b9c8b9fb90f',
  origin: '0x627306090abab3a6e1400e9345bc60c78a8bef57',
  from: '0x345ca3e014aaf5dca488057592ee47305d9b3e10' }
{ sender: '0x627306090abab3a6e1400e9345bc60c78a8bef57',
  origin: '0x627306090abab3a6e1400e9345bc60c78a8bef57',
  from: '0x8f0483125fcb9aaaefa9209d8e9d7b9c8b9fb90f' }

We called the make_calls function and passed the address of calledContract, then caught the four events emitted by each of the different calls. Let’s look at the make_calls function and walk through each step.

The first call is:

`_calledContract.calledFunction();`

We called `calledContract.calledFunction` directly, using high-level ABI for calledFunction. The event emitted is:
```
sender: '0x8f0483125fcb9aaaefa9209d8e9d7b9c8b9fb90f',
origin: '0x627306090abab3a6e1400e9345bc60c78a8bef57',
from: '0x345ca3e014aaf5dca488057592ee47305d9b3e10'
```

The msg.sender is the address of the caller contract. `tx.origin` is the address of our account that sent the transaction to caller. The event was emitted by `calledContract`

STOPPED HERE, FOCUSED ON CHAPTER 13 AND 14, SO BORING I HAD TO SKIP